At first I thought the bank had made a mistake. Some processing error or administrative glitch,
which sent this letter to the wrong customer. I even checked if it was actually addressed to us.
Maybe the postman put it in the wrong mail box? But of course he didn’t. It was addressed to
Sandra Goddard, my mother, who had lived in this house for twenty years. The postman knew that,
and apparently the National Australia Bank did too. It just didn’t make any sense. How could mum
be defaulting on a mortgage, when she owned this house outright for over ten years? I vaguely
remembered the day she and dad celebrated their last mortgage payment. I must have been about
thirteen, as dad left before my fourteenth birthday. At least mum got the house, fully paid for.
The huge red letters LATE PAYMENT screamed at me from the top of the page. I heard mum
come inside, and start unpacking the groceries. She jumped as I confronted her in the kitchen,
waving the bank’s notice in my hand.
‘Mum, what the hell is going on with this letter?’
‘I’ve told you before not to open my mail.’ From her expression, it was obvious she quickly
worked out what the ‘letter’ was about, and wasn’t planning on discussing it with me.
‘But what’s going on? You never pay anything late! And why do you need a mortgage?’ I was
surprised to see that mum looked more scared than angry.
‘Ellen, it’s none of your business. Just forget about it!’ she said repressively.
‘But if you don’t pay a mortgage on a house, they take it away from you! I live here too!’
‘For god’s sake, it’s not going to come to that. I’ll sort it out.’
‘I should have known you’d be too proud to tell me about it. You love this house. How could you
risk losing it? And why do you need the money anyway?’
‘Just leave it Ellen’.
She side stepped round me, determined as usual to avoid a confrontation by leaving the scene. I
heard the front door close and the car start.
Money was something that was never discussed in our family. After dad left, I always suspected
things were a bit tight. It wasn’t like we could ever afford a new car, or an overseas holiday. I don’t
think dad ever paid any maintenance; back in those days I suppose it was easier for fathers to get
away with disappearing, and forgetting they ever had a family. Mum wanted to spend as much time
with us as possible. So she found a job as a teacher’s aide, where she worked school hours, and had
plenty of holidays. After a while, we never mentioned dad anymore.
For a moment, I wished I had never gone to the letterbox. Or been curious enough about the letter
to open it. But as usual, I was bored, and the postman arriving was the first interesting thing that
happened all day. How sad was that? Having seen it, I couldn’t just ignore it. I sat in stunned
silence for a while, and then tried ringing mum’s mobile about five times, hearing it go straight to
voicemail. Mum was a smart woman, a little rigid in her views sometimes, but certainly never silly
about money. Had something changed? My mind raced over different possibilities. Did mum have a
gambling habit? She was always a bit neurotic: did this make her susceptible to addiction? Had she
taken out a loan to cover a debt to someone? Had she just been spending the money without me
noticing? What if someone tricked her into giving them thousands and thousands of dollars? Was
she losing her mind? She was only 54. How much money were we talking about? And why had I
been left totally in the dark about this?
Then on top of all this, came the final blow: my feeling of guilt. I never moved out of home
because I needed mum. She was there for me through all the ups and downs of my piano career, if
you can call a failed attempt at fame a career. She always encouraged me to keep going. Even if it
meant going without things herself, to save up for the entry fee for another competition or the next
interstate trip. When I gave up, after 15 long years of trying, I wasn’t in any state to move out. Even
if I wasn’t close to nervous breakdown half the time, popping HP’s to get out of bed in the morning,
I couldn’t afford to move out. Simple as that. I was pathetic. Mum cared for me, paid all the bills,
bought all the food, looked after the house. And all the time, she was worrying about some
mortgage which she obviously couldn't afford to pay, while I lounged around like a lazy, miserable
freeloader. My measly income as a piano teacher didn't go very far, and mum always said she was
happy for me to live rent free until I could afford to contribute. But why didn’t she ask me for help
when she couldn’t pay the mortgage? I didn’t earn much, but she never even asked. Did mum think
I was so selfish I wouldn’t want to help? And why hadn't she told me about the mortgage in the first
place?
After a couple of hours passed, in which I kept my mind distracted by playing an entire book of
Beethoven’s Sonatas, I heard mum’s car pull into the drive. I had no idea what mood to expect her
to be in. She looked surprisingly fine as she walked in, and sat on the sofa. I finished the piece,
hoping she could enjoy a short recital before having the inevitable conversation with me.
‘I’ve always liked that one,’ she commented, which she said so often I couldn’t think of anything
I played that she didn't like. I turned around on my stool, inviting her to tell me what was going on.
‘What would you like for dinner? I’ve defrosted some chops but we could have them tomorrow if
you don’t feel like them now. It’s a bit hot for chops.’ 
‘Mum, don't worry about dinner. Why have you taken out a mortgage and stopped paying it? We
could lose the house...’
‘Darling, it’s not your concern. Please don’t stress. I’m going to sort it out.’
‘So you're not going to tell me what you used the money for? You’ll just wait until the day they
come to take the house, and then tell me I have to find somewhere else to live?’ Tears welled in my
eyes.
‘Don’t be so melodramatic Ellen! I’ve got a bit behind on a mortgage which was used for
something that doesn’t concern you. It’s my business, and I’ll tell you about it when I’m ready.’
Was she serious? How is worry about losing your home melodramatic? Was it mum’s pride – or
did she think I was too much of a mess to be able to deal with whatever it was?
‘What are you going to do when they come to take the house? Ask them not to? Because it will be
too late by then. What's wrong with you?’ I could no longer keep the anger out of my voice.
Mum was finally starting to lose her composure. ‘It won’t get to that, I hope.’
‘But mum, can’t you even tell me how much it is? You obviously haven’t been able to afford it so
far, so what’s going to change between now and tomorrow?’
Mum shrugged, and her head dropped. She didn’t even have words to convince herself now. And
to my dismay, she started to cry.
‘Please tell me what’s going on. How much money do we need?’
‘Ellen, I promise it will be ok. I can see you're upset I haven't told you what’s been happening,
but, well, you know how things have been with you, and I didn’t want to make it worse. I promise
we won’t be homeless.’
‘Let me help you.’
Mum nodded. I was finally getting somewhere.
‘Can you at least show me the paperwork?’ She nodded again, and surprisingly, got up from the
sofa to fetch it.
She handed me a manila folder labelled ‘mortgage’, and left me to read it. There were only few
sheets of paper inside. On top was an official contract, with a lot of jargon and terms and
conditions. It was dated 1st
November 2008. Almost 3 months ago! On the second page there was a
section, filled in by hand, showing our address under the heading of ‘secured asset’. Then the
maximum loan amount was written under ‘mortgage facility’. It said $20,000. I felt a small sense of
relief. Surely the payments on a $20,000 loan weren’t really huge? There were only three monthly
statements, and I flipped through them. It appeared mum had been paying $155 for the first month.
Not so much money really? I looked at the most recent statement. The repayments on this were 